everybody welcome to impact theory you
were here my friends because you believe
that human potential is nearly limitless
but you know that having potential is
not the same as actually doing something
with it so our goal with this show and
company is to introduce you to the
people and ideas that will help you
actually execute on your dreams all
right today's guest is one of the most
accomplished college basketball players
of all time he's a two-time College
Player of the Year unanimous pick for
the 2002 all-american first team he's a
three-time Duke all-american and he
rocked his time at Duke so hard that
they've retired his number and it now
hangs in the rafters with their other
legends and it didn't in there he was
drafted number two overall by the
Chicago Bulls in the 2002 NBA Draft he
took over Michael Jordan's locker and
became the face of the future of the
team his success was also financially
transformative he was a
multi-millionaire by the time he was 21
he was dripping in cars clothes and cash
from his lucrative endorsements and the
millions that he was banking per year
allowed him to put his parents on
payroll erasing all of their struggles
with money as well he had it all then in
an instant he found himself bleeding to
death laying next to his destroyed
motorcycle and like that it was all gone
he had crashed into a utility pole going
70 miles an hour without any protective
gear his pelvis and left leg were ruined
over ten surgeries and months in the ICU
were required just to stabilize him and
it was unclear if you'd ever walk again
after years years of grueling rehab he
still failed to make his much dreamed
about come back to the NBA realizing
that he was now about the sport that had
come to define him he slid into the
grips of depression and rebuilding
emotionally proved even more difficult
than coming back physically it was a
fight so brutal that it would see him
attempt suicide twice but today not only
is he still here he's thriving having
pulled himself from the depths of
depression to carve an incredible new
path is one of the most popular ESPN
analysts a much sought-after
motivational speaker entrepreneur and
member of the board of USA Basketball
so please help me in welcoming the king
of transformation the managing partner
of the leverage agency the author of the
beautiful raw an uplifting autobiography
life is not an accident the unstoppable
Jay Williams listen my pleasure sir -
that that goes in equal measure I that
was one hell of an intro well thank you
reading your book the the way you open
it is so powerful but like the writing
is amazing so forget that the story in
and of itself is like inspiring and
transformational it's just well written
man so crazy kudos thank you and that
really was what fed into the the intro
was it's this beautiful narrative and
you really take people on this crazy
emotional journey I think the most
powerful gift that you could give our
audience would be to talk about like
what does it take to come back mentally
from okay hey I'm going to be the next
wait I mean you literally were the next
big thing it goes away in an instant you
have to rebuild what is that process Wow
I think the first thing is recognizing
that you are not what you do right and
for me this this monumental thing I was
able to accomplish as far as getting
drafted where as a dream come true just
not for me but for all these young guys
that get drafted NFL MLB NBA you win a
lottery your family feels like they've
made it so you carry this weight of I'm
the way out for everybody so it took me
a very long time to find out who the
hell Jay Williams was without the sport
of basketball but I think one of the
things that I did that was extremely
beneficial is that I love business right
and my dad worked for Amex for 20-plus
years and that was one of our goals you
know the more money I made in basketball
I just wanted to use that platform to
leverage to build a business I had no
idea what business that was yet we were
still I da ting in the process of me
playing
but when my accident happened you know
after I went through multiple surgeries
one of the things that inspires me is
when you see businesses that have really
good boards and all the CEOs I've ever
met you know if you talk to them a day
or two before they're going into their
board meeting they're nervous right
they're they're anxious
there are palms are sweaty because they
have to present to the board members
about where the company was where the
company is and where the company is
going and the steps that he took in
order to help the company either to
their demise or to their benefit so it
was the first time I started thinking
about myself Wow
why don't individuals hold themselves to
the same level companies do and I
started thinking who's on Jay Williams
board and at the time you know I talked
about this in my book because I was 23
years old couldn't play bass when the
more I had a 17 18 year old drug dealer
who was on my board I it was a guy that
just end up talking to it I still was
taking oxycontin because I was addicted
to it from my accident I had friends who
were doing careless things who are on my
board I didn't have the foundation of
the people that needed to help me be
where I wanted to be and there's first
time I started looking at that and
saying okay you know we have multiple
boards I'm going to surround myself with
people that make me better if that was
pastor Carl who is like a brother to me
who runs Hillsong you know United right
that church and help me be a better
human being right with the women who
were in my life or you know just finding
God whatever that may be being even with
my own business CEOs like Carl Leibert
who I saw the way he was with his his
family there was no he balanced going to
work and in his family the importance of
family and how much he loved his wife
and his kids and I started building up
my board man ever since I built out my
board they've helped me accountable and
I was gruesome because I went through
the process of going through my you know
the the negatives and the positives and
them telling me well look you lie you
lie for random reasons a little petty
white lies that you didn't need to tell
you're not accountable you say you're
going to be somewhere you don't show up
you're late you you know get the press
very quickly if I challenge you and
you're hearing all the stuff and as I'm
writing this stuff down
it really resonated with me
so Wow okay these are some of my
weaknesses that the people around me who
love me who have done things the right
way see in me and how do I work on those
and that was the first step in me taking
towards me finding out who I was and
where I wanted to be where did you
develop that sense like hearing time so
having read the book I know that when
you say you were depressed like you were
gone depressed right legitimately trying
to kill yourself
so the to be able to then bring people
into your life not to mollycoddle you
but - like really force you to look at
the things you're doing wrong and I'm
going to guess that that's also what
made you great at basketball how did you
develop that sense of I actually need to
get good like it's not enough to tell a
story actually have to be better at
whatever than anybody else well that was
a gift in the curse my mentality when I
played I was always a kid that didn't
receive the recognition early in my life
everybody else got it so you know for me
I remember the first time I got my first
letter from a college was going into my
junior year in my head coach in high
school guy named Mark Taylor still love
you to the state mark but he was like
you need to commit to Fordham he did go
to for him right now I don't know if the
opportunity's going to be better for you
remember think it's myself well okay I
do I do i commit to the first school
that sent me a letter or do I
I was tattoo on my wrist well actually
the first time I try to commit suicide I
try to cut my wrist that says believe
because my mother's always talked about
either if you don't believe in yourself
and who's going to be leaving you and I
think that was one of the benefits of
being an athlete that was always
overlooked in my opinion it forced me to
work harder and force me to put my head
down now there's some disadvantages to
that too you can get lost in the work
process and not be present to some of
the things that are happening in your
life but I think that mentality and
being around people that inspire me not
by their words but moreso by their
actions I hear a lot of people talk
every single day and I was one of these
guys Tom when I when I was playing you
know it's twenty-one years old you have
no idea what the hell you are you're
trying to learn on the process and you
try to do things the right way but I
think for everybody you get into this
preachy thing about look at me and look
about what I do
and I started not to listen to what
people said but started to watch how
people acted and how they interact with
other people and that helped me set the
bar for where I wanted to be you talk a
lot about that notion of like setting
the bar and at the border people that
hold you to a higher standard is that
like a core belief for you like that
you're only going to succeed like at
whatever level you put the bar I don't
know if I have a bar anymore I think I
just I always want to get better I think
I'm a little bit relentless in that in
that capacity which can be draining for
some people or for people like
romantically people like is that we mean
or I think both you know this is
actually the relationship them in now
it's probably one of the most
challenging relationships that I've ever
been in because she forces me to address
issues I mean we all have issues right
to some degree and there are issues I
have relationship wise too but when
somebody forces you to address and you
allow yourself to be vulnerable and you
try to communicate the worst parts about
who you are that overall that that sheds
you right it's it's so rewarding to
almost feel like you you're coming clean
it that's what writing my book was for
me right nobody knew I tried to
attempted suicide I thought that you
know gave insight into my weakness but
you know then you start talking to other
friends and one of my really good
friends who was my lawyer got a divorce
his wife up and left them really didn't
go through therapy just kind of on a
whim was gone and I started thinking
about for the first time
wow that's his accident I'm watching him
go through the same thing I went through
just in a different vertical a different
silo so helping other people address
their issues while I'm still I'm still
learning myself I'm only 35 years old I
don't have all the answers to so I I
think I'm starting to appreciate the
process and I found relevance in the
process of it's not always going to be
easy they're going to be challenges
they're still going to be curveballs
thrown at me but I can't become
introverted I have to continue to get
outside myself because when you're
uncomfortable that's the only way you're
going to grow
I love that those are like words to live
by in my opinion one of the things that
I loved about your book that you were
just touching on is you were crazy raw
crazy vulnerable and in that like it
made me trust you which one thing that I
find is when you lower your defenses
you're not trying to posture there's so
much power in that I want to read you
one of the quotes that you put in your
book because this was a moment where I
was like okay I I'm like I'm with you
now like up till that point like I was
trying to understand but then when I
read this I was like I'm with you if I
tell you I've made peace with this don't
believe me I will never be fully a peace
knowing that my fate wasn't for lack of
talent or an erosion of skill caused by
age but rather a direct result of one
stupid decision that refused to release
its hold on me how do you think about
because you've talked about like where
it's not even made peace with it like
what is your relationship to what
happened it's an ongoing process I'm not
going to tell you it doesn't piss me off
sometimes when you're watching the game
and you know more so for the love of the
game now so then for the monetary value
that came along with the game I think
for 10 plus years after my accident I
was I held a lot of animosity because I
see guys that I was better than that I
thought I was better than I thought I
was there and everybody I mean that's
okay I already have to be crazy to be
great at something right and seeing
these guys ever signed this one hundred
and thirty-five hundred and fifty
million dollar contract and that used to
say to me so I was so angry about it
like the cut isn't it deserve that I
know things that that guy does and I
thought I was saying that stuff out
publicly but that's the conversations
you have in your mind and me you start
having this conversation with yourself
and garlic and why to hell me like what
did I do to deserve this pain for the
rest of my life so it did it did so let
me ask Otis it would be to a certain
gram not I'm not angry about it anymore
but I still missed the game that was
once my safe haven so for me growing up
calm like you know my every relationship
is different okay my dad worked a lot he
spent a lot of time in New York City my
mother went back to school while she was
a guidance counselor to finally become
principal
there is a history of domestic violence
in my house I think learning about who
that who I was and why I made my mistake
allow me to open my eyes up to finally
forgive my father about the mistake that
he made with my mother now I know if my
mother will forgive my father for that
but for me it was a process of learning
about life in general and about a who I
was 15 years ago maybe I wasn't trying
to be the best version of me hello it's
amazing how many people you talk to you
don't actually think for a second about
trying to become better you're so busy
in the minutiae in the the clutter that
you're running through your life with
your head down and it was the first man
to sit and evaluate and that process
within itself is rewarding peaceful to
my soul of my spirit but still still
drives me because I still know I have
such a long way to go and I have to
continue the process it never stops all
right yeah I mean I really in fact all
those addresses directly do you guys
read the book like there when you see
the way that he can talk about the fact
that there was domestic abuse and yet
still clearly paint the picture of how
not okay that is and yet how much love
they were still in the household like
I'll never be able to capture it but in
the book it was really incredible and it
was one of the ways that you I felt like
you were coming to terms of sort of the
imperfections of everything and like
finding a path through life and doing
something interesting and I want to go
back to the concept of you have to be
crazy to be great at something so I've
never heard of put like that I I agree
with that so like violently that when
you said it I wanted to like flip my
chair up and scream like you literally
and this goes back and it is so [__]
poetic dude that when you tried to
commit suicide and I know life isn't a
poem but like the fact that he tried to
scratch through that when I was I had
the chills again but it gave me the
chills when I read in the book I was
like oh my god like literally I was like
you can't make this [__] up the fact
that you were trying to scratch that
word out in particular but that that was
the thing that had already made you
great and of course at that point I'm
like prognosticating into the future of
the book and I'm going I promise it
comes back to at some point
to believe in himself in something else
and he's and of course you do and like
we'll get into the ESPN thing and how
you end up getting really [__] great
at that by practicing and doubling down
and getting good but talk to me like
when did you a when did you develop it
do you remember like cultivating that
sense of okay I'm not getting the
feedback so I have to believe in me was
it something that you were just
naturally had like how did that notion
of you have to be crazy to be great
find its way into your mind first I've
seen it on a multitude of levels you
know it was really funny my rookie year
you get so damn excited because you're
playing against these guys and dreaming
a [__] plan against your entire life
right you actually crossed over Jordan
right well yeah I I did even though he
he dropped multiple buckets on me and
then told me how he was going to do
which is impressive because he was 40
years old it still pisses me off to this
day I don't know if you can tell but I
remember we were playing against the
Lakers Tom and we were out here at LA
and you know like I always try to
outwork people right that's just how I
made my mark so the game was at seven
like you know what I'm gonna come to the
Staples Center because we're playing
this one Lakers had Kobe and Shaq okay
this is like the championship Lakers so
you know I'm going to get there at 3
o'clock I want to make sure I make 400
made shots before I go back into the
room and then I sit in the zone and I
get ready for the game so you know get
in the car get to the gym get there and
as I'm walking onto the court who do I
see I see Kobe Bryant already working
out anyways okay it's kind of cool it's
Kobe stop Kobe you know and uh you know
so I put my sneakers on and you ever get
lost in what you do where you end up
like wait it's been an hour and a half I
got I'm just I'm here I'm in it so once
I set my foot across that line I started
working out and so I worked out for a
good hour hour and a half and when I
came off after I was done I sat down and
of course I still heard the ball
bouncing and looked down like this guys
still working out he was working out
like it looks like he was in a dead
sweat when I got here and he's still
going and it's not like his moves are
nonchalant
lazy he's doing like game moves you know
I said
there and I lease my shoes am I going to
see how long this goes there watch
twenty five minutes and they got done
okay I think I've seen enough go play
you know come back get in the sauna get
ready for the game that game he drops 40
on us okay
and after the game is over I'm like I
have to ask this guy guy I have to
understand like why why he works like
that right so after games I'm like hey
Kove like why were you in a gym for so
long
he's like cuz I saw you come in ha ha
and I don't want you to know that it
doesn't matter how hard you work that
I'm willing to work harder than you Wow
and he's like if don't hold this there's
nothing wrong with that like I'm not
saying I just like you as a person you
just you inspire me to be better right
and it was the first time I started to
see this level of competitiveness I said
I need to start doing more right Wow
again everybody that I've been around my
life who's been uber successful when I'm
talking monetarily even talking
spiritually yeah my girlfriend said
something to me I really inspires me
okay because I think as I as I got lost
into my career and I want to jump with
the story but as I get lost into my TV
career I had a tendency to put all my
energy and my time into that almost to
make up for what I felt like I lost
before okay and she said you know if you
were to allocate a percentage of the
energy that you put into your career
into yourself and learning more about
yourself and learning more about
yourself in relationships you'll be
successful and it was the first time I
to sit back and say wow that's really
powerful because I think a lot of people
when you get to start addressing other
things you get mentally tired right when
I address TV I don't get mentally tired
this is what I do right but when there's
an unknown something that you haven't
felt like you mastered I don't I'm not
sure about it when it gets frustrating
at code who are you going to be are you
going to be that person that wallows in
their self-pity we're going to be the
person who says you know okay I did this
wrong I did that wrong but how can I be
better and I think that's what I talk
about that relentless mentality to want
to be better at just life in general I
love that and how hilarious that you
would use the word relentless so
you and I have a mutual a deep friend
for you I'm sure and a very strong
acquaintance for me in Tim Grover
somebody who's had a massive impact on
my life but obviously pales in
comparison to what he's done for you
talk to me about Tim his notion of being
relentless what that means to you and
your own willingness to endure an
ungodly amount of suffering that would
be an understatement with 10 first off
he is brilliant he's beyond brilliant
and it wasn't the physical part that was
arduous it was it was the mental and
just to set the stage people he was the
guy that trained you post-injury
when it's like I'm really serious about
this I'm going to go all the way I go to
the best of the best Tim Grover yeah and
you know Tim had trained Michael Jordan
he trained Kobe Bryant but I think a lot
of people get lost in the fact that he
trained them physically between these
guys mentally - and I know for me you
know my leg I have atrophy on the
outside of my left leg okay this muscle
here since I lost my nerve I it's gone
away and I have droplet so my game had
to change and very much like life you're
used to doing one thing at 21 is
different than when you're 35 years old
right right and I had to be opening up
and Boerner above honorable enough to
accept the fact that my game had to be
different in order for me to be
effective well like I said earlier it's
so hard when my brain sees things and my
body before I guess this is a gift of
being athlete to that caliber it right I
see it's gone all right if I bring the
ball down the court and there's a screen
coming you know to your right and you
glance over if I see your eye glanced
within that split second I'm gone
as I seen you take your eye off of me so
now some of my games changed at 21 years
old now sudden that first step is like
it's molasses it's not existing right so
now am I willing to say I'm not that
fast anymore you have to work you into
the screen I have to take my time I have
to actually come off shoulder to
shoulder I've used my body more to
create separation hey my jump shot
wasn't the best I have to be a better
shooter because
don't have that explosion anymore and a
lot of people say that seems pretty easy
but to mentally accept that I'm a
different person now
and to help other people see him a
different person was was challenging and
the major part that was the most
difficult was seeing myself so as an
athlete I was used to people looking at
me in the state of all right and it was
something he kind of fly for you working
your entire life for so when the kid or
when somebody was come up to me they're
like oh my god Tom like your show is
amazing right and you're used to that
affirmation of what you do you're a car
it's worth me putting the time where is
that look for me changed and it looked
really made me depressed too because it
was look from oh my god you're amazing
to look of oh my god I'm so sorry
right or what what happened or used to
be that guy before you messed up and
people don't say things maliciously they
say things more so because they're it's
awkward and they want to start a
conversation and those things would
drive me insane but and Tim forced me to
talk to him about those things it was
the first time I started having
conversations I'm feeling like on the
court I'll be on the court doing a drill
and he's like you have drop foot and
also now what attack the drew a little
bit more and that you know next drill he
like you know hey you see that guy you
were good and I would get up more shots
so he started to find ways to motivate
me and started to take the anger out of
the equation for me too and that was a
it was a hell of a first step in the
process of me rebuilding who I was as a
person so I'm wearing this shirt in
particular for you because there are
people that know how to leverage the
darkness there are people that know how
to leverage the anger Tim is definitely
one of them is you've said that you've
always played better angry
what was your mental talk in those times
where the the level of pain which you go
into great detail the book the level of
pain was like I was squeamish just
reading about it I mean just crazy I
can't imagine I guess what are you just
talking about I'm sure I mean when you
have to do year
of that kind of painful sighs nuts so
what are you doing like self-talk how
are you harnessing like the the dark
side like how did you tap into that des
jeunes him work on that was that
something that was part of the game plan
well we had conversations about
different things which obviously you
know for me at that time I was 23 years
old right so the first time I was even
have conversations and to a degree you
know I think this comes from being out
of school like Duke when you're always
you're always in you know in the face of
the media you learn how to say the right
thing right okay you don't give people
your honest feedback you kind of give
them the rhetoric and I think even when
I started going through therapy I had a
lot of a lot of rhetoric right because I
don't I didn't want to I don't want to
face it I hope you had a bad dream and
you wake up and you're married right yes
and you see your wife and you're like
okay that was a dream right right I
think for a long time for two or three
years I thought I was living a fucked-up
dream mmm and I kept waiting to wake up
I kept waiting to wake up Tim was the
first person that forced me to talk the
talk just talk and it's amazing when you
just open your mouth and you start
saying how you really feel about stuff
let me think about how many people
really say how they feel virtually
nobody exactly I think Tim was the first
person I actually started have like full
transparent transparent conversations
with right I was like I don't like the
person I was like what do you mean I was
like I cheated a lot my girlfriend I
lied a ton I was consumed by money
I said gamble I never gambled you know I
always say things just because it was
the right thing to say not that I was
maliciously a bad person right I just
never even thought about what my actions
were it was too busy moving and Tim
forced me to stop and I still stopped
myself to this day and you stopped
yourself from what focusing on who you
don't want to be and focus on who you do
want to be I just I press pause in life
sometimes and I think it helps I
recalibrate to try to get out of an
obsessive
ah yes or just that you know even the
get out of funks whatever whatever maybe
you know I'm a firm believer in that you
have to find balance in life all right
so they're gonna be times where your
your journeys going to be down here and
it's going to be tough and the same when
things get high you know you signed a
new deal you have you know you have to
be able to keep things in perspective
and I think sometimes when I stop I
force myself to assess okay what are
that were the benefits you know were the
negatives how can i how can I turn this
negative into a positive
all right let me make sure that I don't
get too high and I continue to keep my
head down and work harder because I I
want to achieve more if it's not for me
for the people that work for me or for
my girlfriend or my mom deserves better
so I try to find that one thing because
I'm very goal-oriented that I need to
work towards and once I achieve that
it's another goal and I don't want it to
ever stop because that's what life
should be agreed do you think of
yourself as young or old um old interest
um I lived a life that has been
different not for better or for worse
it's just I feel like mold tool it's
interesting I ask because I'm intrigued
to I think what your story is and I'm
going to reveal myself in my worldview
in this so I'm reading your story you
want to make the comeback and because
the way the book is told I didn't know
if you make the comeback or not right so
I don't follow sports so I didn't know
like does this guy like go back to the
NBA and crush it and like he's like
super famous now or or do you not and
there's no hints of it in the beginning
of the book so it's like unfolding for
me in real time and and then when you
don't make it and there's the second
attempted suicide but I know that like
you're I have the framework of what you
do post basketball so I didn't know if
it was basketball injury basketball and
in post or just basketball injury in the
post but I know when you do post I'm
like okay this works out somewhere like
at some point he gets back on track and
I am utterly convinced that and I don't
believe things happen for a reason by
the way which I know you and I are
diametrically opposed on that so
oh yeah I don't believe but I believe
that there's so much meaning and power
to be taken from anything that happens
so to me looking at like okay I watched
this kid nobody gives him enough
accolades for how good he's getting and
he actually understands the nature of
getting good it's about practicing it's
about showing up it's about putting in
the works about doing more than other
people are willing to do
he goes to college at Duke not impressed
with himself in this first season but oh
dear God
kills himself over the summer to really
get spectacular comes back crushes it
could have gone direct to the NBA feels
the sense of obligation which i think is
beautiful and even though there's no
question you could have made more money
by going into the NBA financially maybe
that was a better decision but I'm
imagining you at the podium and
everyone's like begging you for another
year and you give it to him yeah and I
think this [__] beautiful man I think
that was a gift to that town it's why
your jersey now hangs in the rafters
like you did something beautiful for
that organization I think it's
incredible you do that you go into the
NBA it's all turning to [__] people are
smoking weed like before games there
it's like a total mess you're becoming
somebody you don't want to be but by the
end of the season you figure it out and
crush the last 19 games if I'm not
mistaken and everybody's like woah the
person you're becoming you're about to
become an all-star and then like it's a
[__] movie that's the moment that you
have the accident you have to rebuild
we've already talked about that but your
mind has been consistent through
everything okay the vast majority of
humanity if I take your life and I just
take a million people and I crush them
through that like the percentage of
people that come out the other side is
virtually none so for you like it's the
way that I think of the inner cities the
inner cities consumed most of the people
that it touches and they either
literally die young or they just go on
to do nothing but every now and then you
get jay-z and you go God for the right
person like this pressure cooker is it's
the pressure that makes the diamond
right so because AI think that I'm going
to live forever truly and I understand a
lot of things have to have for that to
be true but I extend that to you you're
even younger than I am so you're going
to live forever it's going to be amazing
so now I want to see okay I know what
this guy's been through I know the
diamond that his mind has become like
what awaits all of us on the other side
of that so that's why I was freaking out
reading the book when you're when you
literally try to cut through the word
believe' and can't by the way what do
you set huge goals for yourself now yes
every day and let me address one other
thing that you said that I find
fascinating because I think it's uh it's
a epidemic within our culture you know
in the American culture so it's so funny
like the comeback right when I was when
I wanted to write my book I got turned
down by multiple publishing agencies if
you're like well like you didn't come
back right you know and I think that's
like the American like due to American
scoop of how we look at things I've was
did it come back and crush it
and and and that's a comeback story I'm
like [__] no like I came back mentally
right like that's a story like that's
that's a story that should be cherished
for younger kids out there for older
people out there doesn't matter you
don't have to come back and do what you
did before and do it exponentially
better you have to come back better as a
person and and and really value that
process I got to come back that's that
that should be an American story so yeah
I think my my goals are a little bit
outlandish for myself I want to own my
own media network one day um that's why
we know I came out okay this is like God
saying right like I you know I have a
two-bedroom apartment in New York I you
know my mom comes and unfortunately
there's a there's a big camera in the
room and there's lights and she's like
she's like are you filming me why I
sleep I was like no but now I make the
maybe interesting content yeah but like
I think about hey how can i how can I be
bigger and better and I think about now
how can I break outside this mold of
just being a college basketball analyst
that's how I got my foot in the door at
TV right but I'm in fact two of with the
process of TV because as you know it's
amazing when you have to be vulnerable
to talk about issues that a lot of
people aren't willing to talk about on
TV like there's a there's something
special about that so if that's me
having conversations with you know
somebody I'm interviewing or
me being lost in you know telling
dialogue
I love it I got it's my passion it's my
new basketball court yes I love that man
so much so my thing is you you said
something I it was in the book you said
the reason that this has become like the
American like narrative for the comeback
story is because it erases the mistake
and I thought that is such a powerful
insight that is exactly why one you
would want to come back for yourself
right so then you know you can stop
feeling bad at it right because you're
playing it in your head ah 24/7 right so
and then the other is it would give hope
to the people watching you that I could
erase my own mistakes like there is a
way to erase it now I've never thought
of it like that I think it's a really
powerful insight but the way that I do
think about it I read one time never let
your past be bigger than your future and
like you so I built a billion-dollar
business I'm familiar and now I've
started something new right have fun toy
top-hat
so now going back to my obsession with
your tattoo I have to believe to be
crazy enough to believe that I can
actually build something bigger than
that and that that will ultimately be
small potatoes but now I know that when
I was doing it and we achieved it and it
was more than a book that I was like
everybody else like they're really just
[__] album like I can't I'm as
shocked as anybody else right like we
set out to build something it happened
so much faster like all of it was a
surprise so - now go okay well not
totally redefine what's possible like
dreaming at that level was my like crazy
big idea oh my god like one day like
because my number is actually a hundred
million I just want to get 200 million
so when we like smash through got to a
billion I was like freaking out right so
then it resets you so now my obsession
is what I'll codenamed terraforming okay
so Elon Musk is going to terraform Mars
so he's literally going to put a colony
there they're going to build an
atmosphere on a planet that to me is
like the definition of dreaming big
right like when you're
and say okay I want to terraform the
planet that means I have to build a
rocket ship and you know like work your
way back to all the things that he's had
to do to get to that point he's amazing
even what you hear we're doing with a
freeway system yeah that's crazy go from
downtown to LAX in like five minutes and
yeah god I'm sorry no no please I mean
that's your right of iminium and that's
exactly what I'm talking about so my
thing is like seeing you now building
dreams that are bigger like and that's
why I asked you if you think of yourself
as older young and I get what you're
saying by being an old soul but at 35 I
hope I can convince you that you're a
baby and that you've got so much of your
life I'm a baby right we've got so much
of our lives left to live there's so
much time to learn and grow and get
better that to fail to believe that you
could do something bigger than being
drafted like that's that would be my
coping mechanism right like I would
immediately go okay cool that's done I'm
not going to look back but I am going to
do something bigger I am going to do
something better because it one it's
exciting and you have given me the
insight that in some way that would
erase that mistake you know it's funny
too for a while and I you're dead-on
with that I associated bigger with
monetary value so for me it was like hey
I could have made two hundred fifty
million in my NBA career how do i how do
I achieve that I guess that's the goal
that's what bigger means and bigger has
changed for me too now meaning impact
right so yes I do want to have my own
media network one day I do want to help
other people film content I love content
but I rather I rather it be I don't
worry about the money now the money's
going to take care of itself if I impact
people
the rest will happen me tell my story
was selfish at first because I wanted to
write a book for me I needed to write a
book for me I needed to sit down and
really go through the [__] the good the
bad and really write it out and I'd even
know if I wanted to share it at first
because a lot of you want to write a
book they're not going to be fully
transparent and be worried about what is
my image what is my
portraying to everybody else is going to
hinder me from getting other deals can I
lose deals that I currently have and
riding it after I got done like wow that
feels good it feels good and it didn't
matter what people said good or bad
some reviews killed my book other
reviews loved it it wasn't I didn't
write it for them at first and then
after I started hearing people tell me
their stories
oh [__] like this is this is what it's
all about
you know and I used to say all kind of
why me why me why me and also in that
conversation changed yeah okay like why
not me like why not me and I think the
more you can start looking at facing
adversity by saying why not me you
approach things with a completely
different out mentality than the person
who feels like they're going to be a
victim you start becoming the hunter
again and the more you can stay with
that hunter mentality it will pay
dividends down the gone dude I love that
that isn't thank you for that when I
will remember you are you kidding me I
wish I had my notebook of my dad
mentally right now so walk me through
you know who Stephen Hawking is I do
okay so you want to talk about losing
your body and he's got an amazing quote
that really empowered me and he said
when you complain nobody wants to help
you which I just thought okay if he's
talking about that if he's talking about
like not to be a victim and he in very
similar ways to what you're talking
about is now you found this new purpose
you going to be able to help people
specifically because you were in the
accident he said look I've made these
contributions to physics because I lost
my body and you know up until that point
I was sort of a lad you know went out
drinking and partying with the boys and
it really took school seriously and it
was only in these moments that I really
as I lost my body it forced me to really
focus on my mind and build something
incredible and that concept to me is is
pretty breathtaking so while I don't
think things happen for a reason it's
incredibly powerful to see the wisdom
that people can mine from whatever's
happened to them if they choose if they
choose for sure
I think choose is a real
the imperative word because a lot of
people choose not choose not to you know
follow up on things that happened in
their past or said time to reflect and
that's why the guy looted to earlier
it's amazing it's like this hamster will
that people just okay you know I see it
all the time I think New York City is a
prime target for it because I can walk
down the street and it's not look
there's a epidemic with homeless people
in New York right I think it's
throughout our country too and there was
a guy who lived outside my apartment and
I have a place in Tribeca I've worked
really hard for it and it would shatter
my soul every morning when I would get
up in my apartment and I have these
these big windows and I look out and I
see this guy who's homeless alright and
I was sitting there one day and I saw so
many people just go by him just on their
phone not paying attention to him not
that he was looking for attention at all
and I got on my apartment I went down I
started talking to him he start finding
out this guy and historian where he's
from and in fact that he lost his
daughter and a really bad accident he
used to work on Wall Street and his wife
divorced them and you know he can't he
can't pick up the pieces and look I
wanted to help the guy you try to talk
the guy down the key was all there
anymore I think it he had succumb to the
just the resentment and the the
contention he had for the world in
general okay but he said something I was
so powerful to me because in a moment
when he was talking about all his
frustrations he said you know what
though I am where I am and only I can
change it and I remember everyone Wow
you know as much as we're talking it you
are the only person that could change it
at the end of day people can want to
help you as much as they want to help
you and I don't think complainings
answer either
I think vulnerability and and talking to
people out what's actually going on in
your life gets them invested in you and
the more you listen to them get some
invest invest it back in them and that's
when a bond is formed but that person
can only take you so far you have to
want to take yourself to a different
place
and if you don't have that then you're
going to stay stuck and a lot of people
choose to stay stuck and we see it every
single day so that always scares me
he's self-aware enough to know that he
is the problem and the solution do you
have like a piece of advice that you get
did you tell him anything like what do
you I didn't really know what to say as
I give a moment and you know I a lot of
people they may not properly articulate
that but they live their lives that way
I mean I just I think the more you're
willing to confront it the more you're
willing to talk about I think talking
helps man now I know this sounds cheesy
not at all but I talked to myself okay
people have seen me in being a little
bit crazy but uh you know I remind
myself of what happened you know I I
wake up in the morning and I always make
sure I look at my leg I have the I can't
pick up my big toe right so I have to
crack my toe my curl always cracks and
hurts in the morning when i crack it cuz
it gets stiff and it just alright my
accident happened like June 19 2003 it
happened it sucked it was painful but it
happened it's a part of my blueprint it
doesn't define me but it's a part of my
story but a lot of people allow that one
moment to define the rest of the story
you can't allow that to happen and you
have to be vulnerable enough with
yourself to accept the fact that [__]
happened bad stuff happens to everybody
you have to drive your own car and if
you don't drive it - mine's going to
drive it for you and not that other
person is driving it may not be a person
it may be a darkness that entity that we
talked about that is easy to get lost in
consumed in if you've ever thought about
waking up looking at your leg cracking
your painful big toe and saying the
accident happened thank God and I am a
fundamentally different human being and
I'm going to impact the lives of
countless people because I have a mind
that is capable of suffering at a level
other people or not and because I went
through the darkest of periods and
clawed my way out
not that it was easy that I clawed my
way out and I know how to help people
now in a way that I never could have
understood if I didn't go through it I I
did say thank you probably I was thirty
years old five years ago I said thank
you for happening to me I'm still
clawing now I don't think you ever call
your way out I think it's a process
it's easier to go back into that that's
why I talk about no reaffirming what
happened and reaffirming where you want
to go to yourself you know we spend so
much time talking to other people and
giving other people advice on what they
need to do in their life and sometimes
you need to down give yourself advice on
what's what's best for you
what's some of the best advice you've
given yourself Wow
I can't live in the past I have to be
present a day I think a lot of times
that you would see me a moment I
wouldn't be there because I was too busy
recounting what was instead of what's
happening currently not even what's
going to happen like it will just wasn't
even present I was just there some other
advice I think that uh I have to
continue to be better I know I know it's
simple but I still I still have faults
man I still make mistakes I'm I'm not
perfect I'm not perfect in relationships
i I've hurt people and I've been hurt
it's a challenge for me to really let
somebody in - you know my own demons
that I suffer from it's a challenge for
me am I really [__] my father I love my
dad
wholeheartedly me writing the book for
our relationship to a degree I try to
talk to him about it
it's a work in progress it's amazing how
some of the people that you love more
than anything you have a difficult time
connecting to but you feel the love you
recognize it so I think there's still so
many aspects of me where there's room
for improvement and there's room for
growth and like you know people say I
can't believe you got yourself out like
I'm still getting myself out of it and
it's never going to stop and that's a
good
because it could have stopped on June
19th and if they have stopped on June 19
2003 how sad would that have been that I
would even have been able to spend time
reflecting on the [__] that I was doing
so now it's like I have it I have a
second chance I'm not going to say that
I sometimes don't get carried away or
get lost in what I'm doing I am
extremely ambitious all right just like
you right so you know that's work I look
some my dough needs to check me my mom
needs to check me I have these people
who are sounding boards in my life right
now who are willing to say difficult
things to me and I asked how many people
do you have that you allowed to be in
your circle that can say painful things
to you that you may not like to hear and
then once you hear them are you willing
to accept it I've been lucky enough that
people in my life like that and I make
sure I try to stay surrounded with those
people that is wise
yeah your whole concept of having a
board of people that really have your
best interests at heart and and I think
that's my wife and I talk a lot about
that that notion of okay I'm hearing
something I don't want to hear this
really hurts and from a random person
this may even lead to like me shutting
down not wanting to hear it but because
I can ask the question does this person
love me with yes and answer it with yes
then you've got a shot to really lower
your defenses and hear it and adopt it
and that's really really important in a
sweet it's rewarding is fulfilling it's
fulfilling to recognize that nobody is
the perfect end product and everybody
has stuff to work on but once you're
able to say wow that that is something I
need to work on and you feel yourself
taking the steps necessary to be better
at it what advice do you have for people
that are going through like real anguish
like real pain I guess either emotional
physical what makes me ask this is I'm
so curious to know what your internal
talk was like during the early days of
physical therapy when it was just
grueling hmm I think the first thing is
- and I do this when I do talks and it's
amazing to see how squirmish and
uncomfortable people get here
that's only person you're dealing with
is you when you're quiet it's
fascinating
fastening to look inside yourself or to
spend time with yourself and whenever I
do a talk or when I talk to people oh I
think you're going through a lot of pain
I first tell them ok I understand what
you're going through but you just need
to stop for one second because what we
have a tendency to do is we over
intergate ourselves with other things I
really don't matter to keep ourselves
busy to keep mouthing right about the
things that do matter so once you're
finally able to stop yourself and you're
present with yourself you have to go
back and you have to address it I'm not
saying that you're going to find a
conclusion right then and there but you
have to recognize that whatever happened
did happen and I try to push people to
find silver linings I think there's
truly a silver lining and everything and
once again it's what you choose to focus
your energy on if you choose to focus
your energy on all the things that God
took away from you or whatever entity
that is that you believe in took away
from you then you will be consumed with
that energy if you try to force yourself
to be consumed with the silver lining
even if you revert back you have to
remind yourself of the silver lining
because it gives you a target goal like
you know it's mental targeting are you
able to focus on something that allows
you to get out of your own way if you
don't have a goal to help you get out of
your own way you will be stuck so what
is that is that your wife is that your
parents whatever you need to use to be
better for you have to do that and you
have to find that it's only got to come
from listening to yourself and spending
time with yourself I love that all right
before I ask you my last question where
can these guys find you online hopefully
everywhere I'm trying to be everywhere I
try to lighten up the conversation a
little bit I I do stuff all over I mean
social media between Twitter Instagram
and and Facebook and I'm trying all
these different new shows I'm trying to
pitch a show called fu money because I'm
fascinated to hear where people's
numbers are and everybody has a number
run which they feel like they can you
know accomplish something and it's
amazing sitting down and talking to
people some people's numbers
or two million some people's numbers are
500 million and some people's numbers
are twenty thousand right and it's not
about the money at all so doing stuff
like that I'm dying to break out and be
an involved entertainment do more
sit-down talks of people and I think
there's this beautiful collision between
culture sports and politics right now
and it it's so fascinating to watch
different people decide to step up out
of their particular silo and speak out
out about other issues that are the ones
that they work in right and how you
respond to that like you know people
saying to me if I make a comment about
where we need to be politically and I'm
not saying that a board trumple I'm
against Trump I don't agree with a lot
of stuff comes doing right now but he is
our commander and tweets I mean our
commander in chief got that so like my I
did a little series called reunited
States of America where it was
fascinating for me to do a social
experiment and to see if people are
willing to listen to what other people
have to think so I sat down with a gay
couple there are two Caucasian males two
over Republicans right which is almost
know yeah it is oxymoron within itself
right to a certain degree and they
talked a little bit about the history
and about know things that happens in
their family and why they vote it for
Trump and but I didn't I think all these
people that I sat down with expected me
to kind of retort and have somewhat of a
contentious dialogue and I just sat
there and I listened and then I let that
stuff play across all my different
social media channels and it okay
everything starts with a conversation
and if you're not willing to hear the
other side and understand where the
other side is coming from you can still
disagree on a multitude of issues but
you don't understand what that person
has gone through that helps them see the
world the way they decide to see the
world but once you understand that then
you can find common ground for a
conversation so trying to do things that
spark those kind of thoughts and to Lex
really stimulate people instead of just
do crazy things for views
I like this I don't think this happens
enough well that leads very beautifully
into my last question which is what is
the impact that you want to have on the
world
I just want to be the best version of me
I don't know if that's ever going to
happen but I want it I hope that I can
help other people get out of their own
way and I do believe that the series of
events that happened in my life happened
for a reason
and I chose to listen to those reasons
and kind of follow through on those
things that I feel like I needed to work
on and just let people know that this if
you're lucky if we're lucky you're
always going to be a work in progress
and you have to want to work you have to
be willing to put in the time and effort
and it's funny because you said
something I really pride myself on that
I thought I did as a basketball player I
did always stay in the gym and I was the
guy to always try to get up more shots
in you you know after Kobe said that I
took my ass back to the gym and worked
out more but you never get better if
you're not willing to put in the time
and basketball is very similar to the
game of life there's going to be ups and
downs sometimes you may turn the ball
over seven times in a row but if you put
into work and you constantly put in the
work you can't allow that one mistake to
go into the next play I love that idea
you if you allow seven turnovers to go
into my next position with the
basketball or that next position in life
if you allow that divorce or if you
allow that passing away of somebody or
loss of a career to go into the next
eight plays you'll have another eight
turnovers you have to be willing to say
that was back there that happened but it
doesn't mean it needs to happen now and
the more I can help people understand
that they're lucky to even be in
addition to have a chance to reinvent or
to re address things from their past it
doesn't matter
no you get somebody that did you wrong
say something to them now your time you
have on this earth is short
and I lose sight of that too doing talks
like this they help me we should always
look for help and that's why I like to
surround myself with those type of
people because they always help you go
your own way okay thank you so much ray
I'm gonna make you dome and that was
amazing
you're awesome do it thank you guys all
right I'm going to crawl through the
camera in a minute I'm telling you
you've got to read this book life is not
an accident it is amazing the way that
he walks you through what happened one
again like I said in the beginning it's
just well-written so if you like good
books you will love this book but the
important part about it is the story
that he tells which to me is the
ultimate one of the most beautiful and
empowering stories of redemption why
because the thing that from the moment
you hear about his accident you'll be
praying for is for him to get back in
the NBA he doesn't he totally takes that
away that's not this story and the
reason that I think that it's so
important is watching him rebuild
another life watching and totally
transform and reinvent himself and at
the claw literally out of the
pitch-black darkness that is depression
and to be able to claw his way out of
that by building a future for himself by
saying that's over that's done I'm
willing to shut the door on that because
remember that's where most people get
paralyzed they walk into a room with a
thousand doors and they're unwilling to
shut any of them so they can't go but
now imagine an even more terrifying one
where you went through the door that
made you feel most alive you were
ecstatic you couldn't believe it you go
through and then it's shut in your face
and what do you do with that and the
fact that this man was able to go
through physical torture literally read
the book and you will see when I say
torture I'm not kidding to go through
physical torture only to then have to go
to the mental torture which is far more
difficult to build a compelling future
for himself and to be willing to apply
all the things that made him great
before the willingness to outwork the
willingness to get out of his own way to
self-assess to finally figure out the
lesson about who you surround yourself
with to grind it out to learn from
mentors like Coach K we didn't even get
a chance to talk about you're going to
hear about all that stuff in the book
and I promise you all the things that
made him great had nothing to do with
basketball and everything to do with his
mind so I am eternally grateful for you
coming on the show I cannot thank you
enough guys dig in this is a weekly show
so if you haven't already be sure to
subscribe please check this man out you
will not regret it and until next time
my friends the legendary okay thank you
very important everybody thanks so much
for joining us for another episode of
impact Theory if this content is adding
value to your life our one ask is that
you go to iTunes and stitcher and rate
and review not only does that help us
build this community which at the end of
the day is all we care about but it also
helps us get even more amazing guests on
here to show their knowledge with all of
us thank you guys so much for being a
part of this community and until next
time be legendary my friend
[Music]